===================================
Teachers Get the Most from Teaching
===================================

:date: 2021/7/12

Two years ago, I was offered an opportunity to teach CS students some
"practical" programming.  Being a self-taught programmer, I felt unsure about
my qualification to teach the bright and diligent to-be computer scientists in
the prestigious institute.  But I also felt compelled to say something to those
who want to learn programming, given the twenty years of coding for some very
interesting problems.  The numerical, scientific, and engineering problems in
real world are much more interesting than what we read in the textbooks!  They
are from everywhere.  The industries need to solve the problems using computers
but most of them do not know how.  And many students pay attention to the
popular IT (Internet, web, mobile, and "cloud", "AI", "ML", etc.) without
knowing the problems, which will change our world in very different ways than
ordering food online.  This is a pity.

So I took the challenge.  I think perhaps some organized introduction to the
art of writing numerical codes might help computer scientists appreciate the
special branch of software development.  Although it is impossible for a single
course to cover everything, I can try to introduce from the software
engineering point of view.  This might also be one of the least addressed in
scientific computing.  Many disciplines have curriculum for numerical analysis,
but numerical methods alone do not build the software for the calculations.
Obviously, like all software, fundamental engineering is required for robust
development.  But the numerical software also requires unique structures and
patterns.  Failure to comply with them leads to a mediocre system which fails
when the problems become critical.  More discussions about the software
development will help the sad stories from happening so often.

Teaching is an amazing experience.  I enjoy the time organizing the notes,
trying to explain and give examples for what I learned in the field, and
guiding students to discuss and plan.  I am very grateful to Prof. Shih-Kun
Huang for his inviting me to teach in NCTU/NYCU and the support from the
department.  While I play the role of a teacher, the students in the past two
years have taught me so much with their creativity and growth.  The course does
not only deliver the organized contents to the audience, but also deepens my
own understandings to the matter of writing code to run fast and solve
problems.

I will continue the course in the coming semester [1]_.  As long as the
students like it, I will be happy to teach it.  If you are interested in
writing numerical codes and/or writing code for solving interesting but
not-so-computer-science problems, come take a look.  It's gonna be fun.

.. [1] :doc:`../../../nsd/index`
