===============
Yung-Yu's Notes
===============

Code development, C++ and Python, computational sciences and software
engineering, high-performance computing, conservation laws.

.. toctree::
  :maxdepth: 1

  nsd/index
  cese/index
  writings

Personal Information
====================

I was trained as a computational scientist and have been practicing scientific
computing and its software engineering since 2002.  I started in aerospace and
computational fluid dynamics (CFD), and work on time-accurate simulations of
conservation laws, unstructured meshes of mixed elements, and :doc:`the
space-time Conservation Element and Solution Element (CESE) method
<cese/index>`.  In 2011, I switched to the semiconductor industry to design and
move forward software products for optical proximity correction (OPC), which
involves high-performance computing (HPC), C++/Python hybrid architecture,
computational geometry, numerical optimization, etc.

In 2012, aided by great people in the open-source community, we hosted the
first `local PyCon in Taiwan <https://tw.pycon.org/>`__.  I enjoy the code and
community and will keep being active in Taiwan and nearby.

The experiences in the industries and open-source practices led me to conclude
that code development is at the central for applications of scientific
computing.  In 2019, I started to organize the practices of building scientific
software in a :doc:`course <nsd/index>`.  Work needs to be done to promote the
art to build numerical software, which is computer programs using numerical
methods to solve mathematical or physical problems.  Useful information should
be circulated among the practitioners.

You can find me `@yungyuc <https://twitter.com/yungyuc>`__ and my code at
https://github.com/yungyuc.  For professional discussions please use
https://www.linkedin.com/in/yungyuc and state clearly who you are and what you
want in your connect invitation.  But, as always, email works: `yyc@solvcon.net
<mailto:Yung-Yu %20 Chen %20%3c yyc@solvcon.net %3e>`__.

.. admonition:: Footer

  I would love to learn interesting problems and share in the setting of open
  source, but expect no change to my full-time employment status.

.. vim: set ff=unix ft=rst fenc=utf8:
